---
layout: post
title: "Governance Working Group Update: Meeting 21 May 2020"
author: Val Grimm
team: The Governance WG <https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance>
---

Hello everyone! 

This blog post summarizes the thematically-related meetings of June 4, June 25, and July 9th. 

## Big picture themes
Define the role of domain working groups and community groups in the Rust Project; Rust governance taxonomy

* There is a need for more clarity about why and how groups are formed, 
    * what group categories mean, 
    * how they relate to each other, 
    * how they relate to the Rust Project
    * and their level of decision-making power
* Rust repository structure and permissions should ideally represent status of groups in the project
* One possibility might be to link to other community portals, such as Mozilla's community portal, where folks can list those groups.
* We discussed the idea of streamlining rfcbot procedures, as discussed in rust-lang/wg-governance#38.

You can find the <br>
[detailed minutes June 4](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.06.04.md)  <br>
[detailed minutes June 25](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.06.25.md)  <br>
[detailed minutes July 9](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.07.09.md)  <br>
on the [wg-governance](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance) repository, but here is a quick summary: <br>

## Next meeting
* Our next meeting will be 23 July 2020 via [Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/223182-wg-governance) 18-19 CET / 1pm-2pm EST / 10-11am PST.
* In 2020 the agenda is always at https://hackmd.io/ATj1rZJaRimaIfIWfAOYfQ
* Current agenda is:
    1. Continue with taxonomy work 

[wg-governance]: https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/
[detailed minutes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.03.12.md
[Zulip thread]: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/223182-wg-governance/topic/meeting.202020-03-12
