+++
layout = "post"
title = "Governance Working Group Update: Meeting 12 March 2020"
author = "Nell Shamrell-Harrington"
team = "The Governance WG <https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance>"
+++

Hello everyone! 

We held another meeting of the Rust Governance Working Group on Zulip on 12 March.

The agenda included
1. Follow up on [the Project Group RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2856)
2. Follow up on moving repositories (community, devtools, and nursery) into the [Rust-Lang GitHub Org](https://github.com/rust-lang/)
3. Pre-RFC process
4. How to manage RFC discussion
5. Plan Agenda for Next time

You can find the [detailed minutes](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.03.12.md) on the [wg-governance](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance) repository, but here is a quick summary: 
* Follow up on the [Project Group RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2856)
* Follow up on moving repos from community, devtools, and nursery into the [Rust-Lang GitHub Org](https://github.com/rust-lang)
* Pre-RFC process
* Managing RFC discussions

## Next meeting
* Our next meeting will be 26 March 2020 via [Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/223182-wg-governance) 18-19 CET / 1pm-2pm EST / 10-11am PST.
* In 2020 the agenda is always at https://hackmd.io/ATj1rZJaRimaIfIWfAOYfQ
* Current plan is:
    1. Domain Working Group changes
    2. Pre-RFC RFC (if ready)

[wg-governance]: https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/
[detailed minutes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.03.12.md
[Zulip thread]: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/223182-wg-governance/topic/meeting.202020-03-12
