+++
path = "inside-rust/2020/05/21/governance-wg"
title = "Governance Working Group Update: Meeting 21 May 2020"
authors = ["Val Grimm"]
aliases = ["inside-rust/2020/05/21/governance-wg.html"]

[extra]
team = "The Governance WG"
team_url = "https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance"
+++

Hello everyone! 

We held another meeting of the Rust Governance Working Group on Zulip on 21 May.
Agenda:

- Domain WG retrospective
- Pre-RFC process

You can find the [detailed minutes](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.05.21.md) 
on the [wg-governance](https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance) repository, but here is a quick summary: 
* Domain working groups followup
  - Survey sent, Niko to post on the GitHub issues to indicate no new domain teams are planned for now.
* Proposal procedures / aka "Pre-RFC"
  - Proposal starts from motivation + problem
  - Need supporter to develop proposal into PR/RFC
  - Niko created a [draft RC](https://hackmd.io/StXzJPw7SriuM4COL_YfEw). 
    Comments on the draft best placed in [#t-lang > Design meeting: procedures](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/213817-t-lang/topic/Design.20meeting.3A.20procedures)

## Next meeting
* Our next meeting will be 4 June 2020 via [Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/223182-wg-governance) 18-19 CET / 1pm-2pm EST / 10-11am PST.
* In 2020 the agenda is always at <https://hackmd.io/ATj1rZJaRimaIfIWfAOYfQ>
* Current agenda is:
    1. Domain Working Group changes
    2. Pre-RFC RFC 

[wg-governance]: https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/
[detailed minutes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-governance/blob/master/minutes/2020.03.12.md
[Zulip thread]: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/223182-wg-governance/topic/meeting.202020-03-12
