---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.9"
author: The Rust Core Team
---

The Rust team is happy to announce the latest version of Rust, 1.9. Rust is a
systems programming language focused on safety, speed, and concurrency.

As always, you can [install Rust 1.9][install] from the appropriate page on our
website, and check out the [detailed release notes for 1.9][notes] on GitHub.
About 1400 patches were landed in this release.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-190-2016-05-26

### What's in 1.9 stable

Rust 1.9 contains some exciting new things!

First up, a new attribute for library authors: `#[deprecated]`. Authors of
libraries can now tag items with this attribute, and users of their crate
will see a warning when it is used. This new feature was defined in [RFC 1270].

[RFC 1270]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/1270-deprecation.md

We now publishes std binaries for the `mips-unknown-linux-musl`,
`mipsel-unknown-linux-musl`, and `i586-pc-windows-msvc` targets.

[The time complexity of comparing variables for equivalence][compare] during
type unification is reduced from O(n!) to O(n). What does this mean? Certain
kinds of code compiles much, much faster.

[compare]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/32062

Strings are a very common type, and implement a lot of different traits.
Specifically, when converting between `&str` and `String`, you have many
options. Rustaceans used these two the most:

```rust
let s = "some string".to_string();
let s = "some string".to_owned();
```

The former is the official convention, but it was discovered that it's not
as fast as the second method. For a long time, it was not possible to improve
this situation, however, a new language feature has landed on nightly and made
this possible. [`libstd` now uses this internally][str] to make the two equivalent.

[str]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/32586

Finally, this feature is technically a library change, but it's worth
mentioning here as well. The `std::panic` module is being stabilized. This
allows panics to be caught:

```rust
use std::panic;

let result = panic::catch_unwind(|| {
    println!("hello!");
});
assert!(result.is_ok());

let result = panic::catch_unwind(|| {
    panic!("oh no!");
});
assert!(result.is_err());
```

This behavior was defined in [RFC 1236].

[`std::panic`]: http://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/panic/index.html
[RFC 1236]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1236

Historically, this has not been possible in Rust: panics are always
unrecoverable. And in practice, this is still how they should be used. While
the current implementation of `panic!` does unwinding, in a future release,
crates will be able to choose a different implementation, namely, that
`panic!` causes an abort, rather than unwind. Given that panics are for
non-recoverable errors only, this is a valid implementation.

If panics are for non-recoverable errors, why provide an interface for
recovering from them? There are two big use-cases here:

* Embedding Rust in other languages
* Abstractions that manage threads

For the first case, unwinding across a language boundary is undefined behavior,
and often leads to segfaults in practice. This means that when embedding Rust
inside of other languages, you must avoid any code that can possibly panic, or
rely on the (still unstable and only recently landed) 'abort' implementation of
panic. Allowing panics to be caught at the language boundary provides more
options in this case: an issue in Rust can return an error, rather than aborting
the entire process. This is very important for many use-cases of embedding Rust;
aborting is not always an acceptable option.

In the second, consider a threadpool library. If a thread panics, it's
reasonable for the pool to not want to abort, but instead report the error,
and, depending on the details, possibly even restart the thread, in an
Erlang-style model. Recovering from these kinds of errors is very useful.

This change had a lot of discussion and thought put into it, by a large group
of people. A significant worry about this change is that people may use it to
try and emulate exceptions, which is not the intention of this functionality.
However, the use-cases for this feature are legitimate, and there are two
reasons we believe that this will not happen, generally:

* Rust already has a very strong culture of using `Result<T, E>` and `panic!`
  appropriately, and a new function will not change this culture overnight.
* A significant part of Rust's userbase desires the abort implementation of
  panic, and libraries will need to work with both implementations.

See the [detailed release notes][notes] for more.

#### Library stabilizations

About 80 library functions and methods are now stable in 1.8. Lots of stuff!
The most major is the `std::panic` module, described in the previous section,
but there's a lot more too:

* Raw pointers gained `as_ref()` and `as_mut()`, which returns an `Option<&T>`.
* `char` gained the ability to decode into UTF-16.
* `BTreeSet` and `HashSet` gained the `take()`, `replace()`, and `get()` methods.
* `OsString` gained some methods to bring it up to parity with `String`.
* `SocketAddr` and its variants gained `set_ip()` and `set_port()`.
* Slices gained `copy_from_slice()`, a way to efficiently copy a slice.
* `ptr::{read,write}_volitile()` allow for volitile reading and writing from a
  raw pointer.
* `TcpStream`, `TcpListener`, and `UdpSocket` gained a number of methods that
  let you set various aspects of the connection.

Finally, many of the types in `libcore` did not contain a `Debug`
implementation. [This was fixed](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/32054).

See the [detailed release notes][notes] for more.

#### Cargo features

There were two major changes to Cargo:

First, Cargo has historically not been able to be run concurrently. [This has
been fixed](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/pull/2486).

Second, a new flag, `RUSTFLAGS`, [was
added](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/pull/2241). This allows you to
specify arbitrary flags to be passed to `rustc` through an environment
variable, which is useful for packagers, for example.

See the [detailed release notes][notes] for more.

### Contributors to 1.9

We had XXX individuals contribute to 1.9. Thank you so much!

* YOUR NAME HERE
