---
layout: post
title: "Launching the 2017 State of Rust Survey"
author: The Rust Community Team
description: "Hearing from you about the second year of Rust"
---

Rust's second birthday is a little less than two weeks away (May 15th, 2017), so
it's time for us to reflect on our progress over the past year, and how we
should plan for the future. The Rust Community Team is pleased to announce our
[2017 State of Rust Survey][survey]! Whether or not you use Rust
today, we want to know your opinions. Your responses will help the project
understand its strengths and weaknesses, and to establish development
priorities for the future.

Completing this survey should take about 10 to 15 minutes, and is anonymous
unless you choose to give us your contact information. We will be accepting
submissions until June 12th, 2017, and we will write up our findings a month or
so afterwards to [blog.rust-lang.org]. You can see last year's results
[here][2016 survey].

Please help us spread the word by sharing the above link on your social network
feeds, at meetups, around your office and in other communities.

If you have any questions, please see our [frequently asked questions] or email
the Rust Community team at [community-team@rust-lang.org].

Finally, we wanted to thank everyone who helped develop, polish, and test the
survey!

Happy birthday, Rust. Have another great year.

[survey]: https://goo.gl/forms/pjcm3r2UjZhpAk4M2
[blog.rust-lang.org]: https://blog.rust-lang.org
[frequently asked questions]: https://github.com/rust-community/team/wiki/State-of-the-Rust-Language-Community-Survey-FAQ
[community-team@rust-lang.org]: mailto:community-team@rust-lang.org
[2016 survey]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2016/06/30/State-of-Rust-Survey-2016.html
