---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rustup 1.23.0"
author: The Rustup Working Group
---

The rustup working group is happy to announce the release of rustup version 1.23.0. [Rustup][install] is the recommended tool to install [Rust][rust], a programming language that is empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.

If you have a previous version of rustup installed, getting rustup 1.23.0 is as easy as closing your IDE and running:

```
rustup self update
```

Rustup will also automatically update itself at the end of a normal toolchain update:

```
rustup update
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get rustup][install] from the appropriate page on our website.

[rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org
[install]: https://rustup.rs

## What's new in rustup 1.23.0

This release has a few important things we'd like to highlight:

`rustup` is now available for the Apple M1 based computers. We now have an
`aarch64-apple-darwin` release of `rustup` which means that you ought to
be able to install a native `rustup` and compiler toolset on that platform.

**NOTE:** As of the time of this blog post, there is no _stable_ release of
the M1 toolchain, so you will need to select `beta` or `nightly` when
prompted for a toolchain to install. Also, this new platform is currently
only supported at Tier 2. You can track the support details here:
<https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/73908>

There is now support for two-part version numbers. You can
`rustup toolchain install 1.48` for example, and this will provide you with a
`1.48` toolchain which will update if a `1.48.1` toolchain update were released.
This can be useful if you often want the latest patch of a particular compiler
release for CI etc.

The documentation for `rustup` is now in an mdbook style book and is published
here: <https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/>

We now support a structured `rust-toolchain` file format, though the current
single-line simple format is still supported. You can find more
information in the [overrides chapter][toolchain-file] of our new book, but here
is an example of a new toolchain override file which selects a specific version
of `nightly`, requires `clippy`, and causes the `wasm32-unknown-unknown` target
to be installed as well:

```toml
[toolchain]
channel = "nightly-2020-11-27"
components = [ "clippy" ]
targets = [ "wasm32-unknown-unknown" ]
```

[toolchain-file]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/overrides.html#the-toolchain-file

There are many more changes in 1.23.0, and we invite you to take a look at our
[changelog][] if you'd like to know more.

[changelog]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/blob/stable/CHANGELOG.md

## Thanks

Thanks to all the contributors who made rustup 1.23.0 possible!

- Aaron Loucks
- Aleksey Kladov
- Aurelia Dolo
- Camelid
- Chansuke
- Carol (Nichols || Goulding)
- Daniel Silverstone
- Dany Marcoux
- Eduard Miller
- Eduardo Broto
- Eric Huss
- Francesco Zardi
- FR Bimo
- Ivan Nejgebauer
- Ivan Tham
- Jake Goulding
- Jens Reidel
- Joshua M. Clulow
- Joshua Nelson
- Jubilee Young
- Leigh McCulloch
- Lzu Tao
- Matthias Krüger
- Matt Kraai
- Matt McKay
- Nick Ashley
- Pascal Hertleif
- Paul Lange
- Pietro Albini
- Robert Collins
- Stephen Muss
- Tom Eccles
