+++
layout = "post"
title = "Announcing Rustup 1.25.1"
author = "The Rustup Working Group"
+++

The rustup working group is announcing the release of rustup version 1.25.1.
[Rustup][install] is the recommended tool to install [Rust][rust], a
programming language that is empowering everyone to build reliable and
efficient software.

If you have a previous version of rustup installed, getting rustup 1.25.1 is as
easy as stopping any programs which may be using Rustup (e.g. closing your IDE)
and running:

```
rustup self update
```

Rustup will also automatically update itself at the end of a normal toolchain
update:

```
rustup update
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get rustup][install] from the
appropriate page on our website.

[rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org
[install]: https://rustup.rs

## What's new in rustup 1.25.1

This version of rustup fixes a regression introduced in the previous release
(1.25.0), which caused some workflows to fail.

### Regression in nested Cargo invocations with different toolchains

When you invoke Rust or Cargo installed by rustup, you're not running them
directly. Instead, you run [rustup "proxy" binaries][proxies], whose job is to
detect the right toolchain (parsing the `+channel` CLI argument or using one of
the defaults) and run it.

Running these proxies is not instantaneous though, and for example a `cargo
build` invocation might execute several of them (the initial `cargo` invocation
plus one `rustc` for every dependency), slowing down the build.

To improve performance, rustup 1.25.0 changed the proxies code to set the
[`RUSTC` and `RUSTDOC` environment variables][cargo-env] when missing, which
instructed Cargo to skip the proxies and invoke the binaries defined in those
variables directly. This provided a performance gain when building crates with
lots of dependencies.

Unfortunately this change broke some users of rustup, who did something like:

* The first Cargo invocation (for example an extension, an alias or an
  integration test) uses toolchain `foo`, setting the `RUSTC` and `RUSTDOC`
  environment variables pointing to that toolchain.

* The first invocation calls Cargo again, but this time using toolchain `bar`
  (for example `cargo +bar build`). This does **not** set the `RUSTC` and
  `RUSTDOC` environment variables pointing to `bar`, as those variables are
  already present.

* The second invocation of Cargo then invokes rustc by using the `RUSTC`
  environment variable and skipping the proxy, which results in the `foo`
  toolchain being invoked. Previous versions of rustup invoked the proxy
  instead, which would correctly detect and use the `bar` toolchain.

Rustup 1.25.1 fixes this regression by reverting the change. The rustup working
group is discussing in [issue #3035][issue] plans to re-introduce the change in
a future release while avoiding breakage.

[proxies]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/concepts/proxies.html
[cargo-env]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/environment-variables.html#environment-variables-cargo-reads
[issue]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3035

## Thanks

Thanks again to all the contributors who made rustup 1.25.1 possible!

- Daniel Silverstone (kinnison)
- Robert Collins (rbtcollins)
- Jynn Nelson (jyn514)
- Pietro Albini (pietroalbini)
