---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.64.0"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.64.0. Rust is a
programming language empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient
software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, you can get 1.64.0
with:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get
`rustup`](https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html) from the appropriate page on
our website, and check out the [detailed release notes for
1.64.0](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/stable/RELEASES.md#version-1640-2022-09-22)
on GitHub.

If you'd like to help us out by testing future releases, you might consider
updating locally to use the beta channel (`rustup default beta`) or the nightly
channel (`rustup default nightly`). Please
[report](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/new/choose) any bugs you
might come across!

## What's in 1.64.0 stable

### C-compatible FFI types in core and alloc

When calling or being called by C ABIs, Rust code can use type aliases like
`c_uint` or `c_ulong` to match the corresponding types from C on any target,
without requiring target-specific code or conditionals.

Previously, these type aliases were only available in `std`, so code written
for embedded targets and other scenarios that could only use `core` or `alloc`
could not use these types.

Rust 1.64 now provides all of the `c_*` type aliases in
[`core::ffi`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/ffi/index.html), as well as
[`core::ffi::CStr`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/ffi/struct.CStr.html) for
working with C strings. Rust 1.64 also provides
[`alloc::ffi::CString`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/alloc/ffi/struct.CString.html)
for working with owned C strings using only the `alloc` crate, rather than the
full `std` library.

### Enhancing `.await` with `IntoFuture`

Rust 1.64 stabilizes the
[`IntoFuture`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/future/trait.IntoFuture.html)
trait. `IntoFuture` is a trait similar to
[`IntoIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.IntoIterator.html),
but rather than supporting `for ... in ...` loops, `IntoFuture` changes how
`.await` works. With `IntoFuture`, the `.await` keyword can await more than
just futures; it can await *anything which can be converted into a `Future` via
`IntoFuture`* - which can help make your APIs more user-friendly!

Take for example a builder which constructs requests to some storage provider
over the network:

```rust
pub struct Error { ... }
pub struct StorageResponse { ... }:
pub struct StorageRequest(bool);

impl StorageRequest {
    /// Create a new instance of `StorageRequest`.
    pub fn new() -> Self { ... }
    /// Decide whether debug mode should be enabled.
    pub fn set_debug(self, b: bool) -> Self { ... }
    /// Send the request and receive a response.
    pub async fn send(self) -> Result<StorageResponse, Error> { ... }
}
```

Typical usage would likely look something like this:

```rust
let response = StorageRequest::new()  // 1. create a new instance
    .set_debug(true)                  // 2. set some option
    .send()                           // 3. construct the future
    .await?;                          // 4. run the future + propagate errors
```

This is not bad, but we can do better here. Using `IntoFuture` we can combine
_"construct the future"_ (line 3) and _"run the future"_ (line 4) into a single
step:

```rust
let response = StorageRequest::new()  // 1. create a new instance
    .set_debug(true)                  // 2. set some option
    .await?;                          // 3. construct + run the future + propagate errors
```

We can do this by implementing `IntoFuture` for `StorageRequest`. `IntoFuture`
requires us to have a named future we can return, which we can do by creating a
"boxed future" and defining a type alias for it:

```rust
// First we must import some new types into the scope.
use std::pin::Pin;
use std::future::{Future, IntoFuture};

pub struct Error { ... }
pub struct StorageResponse { ... }
pub struct StorageRequest(bool);

impl StorageRequest {
    /// Create a new instance of `StorageRequest`.
    pub fn new() -> Self { ... }
    /// Decide whether debug mode should be enabled.
    pub fn set_debug(self, b: bool) -> Self { ... }
    /// Send the request and receive a response.
    pub async fn send(self) -> Result<StorageResponse, Error> { ... }
}

// The new implementations:
// 1. create a new named future type
// 2. implement `IntoFuture` for `StorageRequest`
pub type StorageRequestFuture = Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = Result<StorageResponse, Error> + Send + 'static>>
impl IntoFuture for StorageRequest {
    type IntoFuture = StorageRequestFuture;
    type Output = <StorageRequestFuture as Future>::Output;
    fn into_future(self) -> Self::IntoFuture {
        Box::pin(self.send())
    }
}
```

This takes a bit more code to implement, but provides a simpler API for users.

In the future, the Rust Async WG hopes to simplify the creating new named
futures by supporting [`impl Trait` in `type` aliases (Type Alias Impl Trait or
TAIT)](https://rust-lang.github.io/impl-trait-initiative/explainer/tait.html).
This should make implementing `IntoFuture` easier by simplifying the type
alias' signature, and make it more performant by removing the `Box` from the
type alias.

### Stabilizing `ready!` and `poll_fn`

When working with the low-level details of futures, you'll currently often
encounter the [`Poll`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/enum.Poll.html) type.
We've stabilized a few helpers for working with this type:

- [`ready!`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/macro.ready.html) takes a
  `Poll` and returns from the containing function for `Poll::Pending`, or
  returns the contained value in a `Poll::Ready`. This can be useful when
  implementing futures manually using `Poll`.
- [`poll_fn`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/future/fn.poll_fn.html) turns a
  function returning `Poll` into a future.

In the future, we hope to provide simpler APIs that require less use of
low-level details like `Poll` and `Pin`, but in the meantime, these helpers
make it easier to write such code.

### `rust-analyzer` now available via `rustup`, no longer in preview

Users of `rust-analyzer` can now obtain it via `rustup` on the stable and beta
channels, not just on nightly.

### Stabilized APIs

The following methods and trait implementations are now stabilized:

- ...

These APIs are now usable in const contexts:

- ...

### Compatibility notes

Rust 1.64 includes some changes that might prevent you from upgrading:

* As [previously
  announced](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2022/08/01/Increasing-glibc-kernel-requirements.html),
  `linux` targets now require at least Linux kernel 3.2 (except for targets which
  already required a newer kernel), and `linux-gnu` targets now require glibc
  2.17 (except for targets which already required a newer glibc).

* Rust 1.64.0 changes the memory layout of `Ipv4Addr`, `Ipv6Addr`,
  `SocketAddrV4` and `SocketAddrV6` to be more compact and memory efficient.
   This internal representation was never exposed, but some crates relied on
   it anyway by using `std::mem::transmute`, resulting in invalid memory
   accesses. Such internal implementation details of the standard library are
   *never* considered a stable interface. To limit the damage, we worked with
   the authors of all of the still-maintained crates doing so to release fixed
   versions, which have been out for more than a year. The vast majority of
   impacted users should be able to mitigate with a `cargo update`.

As part of the [RLS
deprecation](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2022/07/01/RLS-deprecation.html), this
is also the last release containing a copy of RLS. Starting from Rust 1.65.0,
RLS will be replaced by a small LSP server showing the deprecation warning.

### Other changes

There are other changes in the Rust 1.64 release, including:

* Windows builds of the Rust compiler now use profile-guided optimization,
  providing performance improvements of 10-20% for compiling Rust code on
  Windows.

* If you define a struct containing fields that are never used, rustc will warn
  about the unused fields. Now, in Rust 1.64, you can enable the
  `unused_tuple_struct_fields` lint to get the same warnings about unused
  fields in a tuple struct. In future versions, we plan to make this lint
  warn by default.  Fields of type unit (`()`) do not produce this warning,
  to make it easier to migrate existing code without having to change tuple
  indices.

* When working with collections of related libraries or binary crates in one
  Cargo workspace, you can now avoid duplication of common field values between
  crates, such as common version numbers, repository URLs, or `rust-version`.
  This also helps keep these values in sync between crates when updating them.
  For more details, see
  [`workspace.package`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/workspaces.html#the-workspacepackage-table),
  [`workspace.dependencies`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/workspaces.html#the-workspacedependencies-table),
  and ["inheriting a dependency from a
  workspace"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#inheriting-a-dependency-from-a-workspace).

* When building for multiple targets, you can now pass multiple `--target`
  options to `cargo build`, to build all of those targets at once. You can
  also set [`build.target`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html#buildtarget)
  to an array of multiple targets in `.cargo/config.toml` to build for
  multiple targets by default.

Check out everything that changed in
[Rust](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/stable/RELEASES.md#version-1640-2022-09-22),
[Cargo](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#cargo-164-2022-09-22),
and [Clippy](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#rust-164).

### Contributors to 1.64.0

Many people came together to create Rust 1.64.0.
We couldn't have done it without all of you.
[Thanks!](https://thanks.rust-lang.org/rust/1.64.0/)
