---
layout: post
title: "The wasm32-wasip2 Target Has Reached Tier 2 Support"
author: Yosh Wuyts
---

In April of this year we posted an update about [Rust's WASI
targets](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2024/04/09/updates-to-rusts-wasi-targets.html)
to the main Rust blog. In it we covered the rename of the `wasm32-wasi` target
to `wasm32-wasip1`, and the introduction of the new `wasm32-wasip2` target as a
"tier 3" target. This meant that while the target was available as part of
`rust-lang/rustc`, it was not guaranteed to build. We're pleased to announce
that this is changing.

For those unfamiliar with WebAssembly (Wasm) components and WASI 0.2, here is a
quick, simplified primer:

- **Core Wasm** is a (virtual) instruction format for programs to be compiled into (think: x86-64).
- **Wasm components** are a container format and type system that wrap Core Wasm instructions into typed, hermetic binaries and libraries (think: ELF).
- **WASI** is a reserved namespace for a collection of standardized Wasm component interfaces (think: POSIX header files).

For a more detailed explanation see the [WASI 0.2 announcement
post](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2) on the Bytecode Alliance
blog.

## What's new?

Starting Rust 1.81 (2024-09-05) the `wasm32-wasip2` (WASI 0.2) target will be
made available as a tier-2 target. Among other things this now means it is
guaranteed to build, and will become available to install as a prebuilt target
via Rustup using the following command:

```bash
rustup target add wasm32-wasip2
```

Up until now Rust users writing [Wasm
Components](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org) would use tools (like
[cargo-component]) which target the WASI 0.1 target (`wasm32-wasip1`) which
would be packaged into a WASI 0.2 Component by a post-processing step invoked
separately by the tooling. With the introduction of `wasm32-wasip2` as a tier-2
target, that tooling can instead directly target WASI 0.2 without the need for
additional tooling or compat shims.

What this also means is that ecosystem crates can begin targeting WASI 0.2
directly for platform-specific code. WASI 0.1 did not have support for sockets.
Now that we have a stable tier 2 platform available, crate authors should be
able to finally start writing WASI-compatible network code. To target WASI 0.2
from Rust, authors can use the following `cfg` attribute:

[cargo-component]: https://github.com/bytecodealliance/cargo-component

```rust
#[cfg(all(target_os = "wasi", target_env = "p2"))]
mod wasip2 {
    // items go here
}
```

## What's next?

The WASI 0.2 Rust target being on tier 2 means it's supported and stable. But
unfortunately it is also still incomplete. Most notably stdlib support is still
limited. To target platform-native functionality we recommend to either use the
[wasi](https://docs.rs/wasi/latest/wasi/) crate directly, which is the WASI
equivalent to the `libc` crate. Or else generate their own bindings to the [WASI
specifications](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/tree/main/wasip2) using the
[wit-bindgen](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wit-bindgen/) generator.

We expect to gradually extend the Rust stdlib with support for WASI 0.2 APIs
throughout the remainder of this year into the next. That work has already
started, with for example
[rust-lang/rust#129638](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/129638) adding
native support for `std::net` to WASI 0.2. We expect more of these PRs to land
through the remainder of the year.

## Conclusion

The `wasm32-wasip2` target will become installable via rustup starting Rust
1.81.0 (2024-09-05). This will make it possible for the Rust compiler to
directly compile to the Wasm Components format, targeting the WASI 0.2
interfaces. We're excited for Wasm Components and WASI 0.2 to have reached this
milestone, and are excited to see what folks in the ecosystem will be building
with it!
