---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.83.0"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.83.0. Rust is a programming language empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via `rustup`, you can get 1.83.0 with:

```console
$ rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`](https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html) from the appropriate page on our website, and check out the [detailed release notes for 1.83.0](TODO).

If you'd like to help us out by testing future releases, you might consider updating locally to use the beta channel (`rustup default beta`) or the nightly channel (`rustup default nightly`). Please [report](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/new/choose) any bugs you might come across!

## What's in 1.83.0 stable

### New const capabilities

This release includes several large extensions to what code running in const contexts can do. This refers to all code that the compiler has to evaluate at compile-time: the initial value of `const` and `static` items, array lengths, enum discriminant values, const generic arguments, and functions callable from such contexts (`const fn`).

**References to statics.**
So far, `const` items and `const fn` were forbidden from referencing `static items`.
This limitation has now been lifted:
```rust
static S: i32 = 25;
const C: &i32 = &S;
```
Note, however, that reading the value of a mutable or interior mutable static is still not permitted in const contexts. Furthermore, the final value of a constant may not reference any mutable or interior mutable statics:
```rust
static mut S: i32 = 0;

const C1: i32 = unsafe { S };
// error: constant accesses mutable global memory

const C2: &i32 = unsafe { &S };
// error: encountered reference to mutable memory in `const`
```
These limitations ensure that constants are still "constant": the value they evaluate to, and their meaning as a pattern (which can involve dereferencing references), will be the same throughout the entire program execution. However, a constant is permitted to evaluate to a raw pointer that points to a mutable or interior mutable static:
```rust
static mut S: i32 = 64;
const C: *mut i32 = &raw mut S;
```

**Mutable references and pointers.**
It is now possible to use mutable references in const contexts:
```rust
const fn inc(x: &mut i32) {
    *x += 1;
}

const C: i32 = {
    let mut c = 41;
    inc(&mut c);
    c
};
```
Mutable raw pointers and interior mutability are also supported:
```rust
use std::cell::UnsafeCell;

const C: i32 = {
    let c = UnsafeCell::new(41);
    unsafe { *c.get() += 1 };
    c.into_inner()
};
```
However, mutable references and pointers can only be used *inside* the computation of a constant, they cannot become a part of the final value of the constant:
```rust
const C: &mut i32 = &mut 4;
// error[E0764]: mutable references are not allowed in the final value of constants
```

This release also ships with a whole bag of new functions that are now stable in const contexts (see the end of the "Stabilized APIs" section).

These new capabilities and stabilized APIs unblock an entire new category of code to be executed inside const contexts, and we are excited to see how the Rust ecosystem will make use of this!

### Stabilized APIs

TODO

These APIs are now stable in const contexts:

TODO

### Other changes

Check out everything that changed in [Rust](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/releases/tag/1.83.0), [Cargo](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#cargo-183-2024-11-28), and [Clippy](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#rust-183).

## Contributors to 1.83.0

Many people came together to create Rust 1.83.0. We couldn't have done it without all of you. [Thanks!](https://thanks.rust-lang.org/rust/1.83.0/)